[DataGridPro] Autosize columns (#10180)
mui/mui-x: docs/data/data-grid/column-dimensions/column-dimensions.md

- `onColumnResize`: Called while a column is being resized.
- `onColumnWidthChange`: Called after the width of a column is changed, but not during resizing.

> ## Autosizing [<span class="plan-pro"></span>](/x/introduction/licensing/#pro-plan 'Pro plan')

Reviewer: Let's add it to the [feature comparison](https://mui.com/x/react-data-grid/getting-started/#feature-comparison) 🙂

The `DataGridPro` also allows for autosizing the columns' dimensions based on their content. It can be autosized by 3 methods:

- Calling the `.autosizeColumns` API method,
- Adding the `autosizeOnMount` prop,
- Double-clicking a column header separator on the grid.

> You can pass options directly to the API method when you call it. If you need to configure autosize for the other two methods, you can provide the options in the `autosizeOptions` prop.

Author: Link to options API page

{{"demo": "ColumnAutosizing.js", "disableAd": true, "bg": "inline"}}

> :::warning:::

Author: `:::warn:::`

> You can pass options directly to the API method when you call it. If you need to configure autosize for the other two methods, you can provide the options in the `autosizeOptions` prop. Note that for the separator double-click method, the clicked column will be passed to the `.columns` option unless `autosizeOptions` already has a `.columns` list.

Reviewer: Is it worth mentioning that `minWidth` and `maxWidth` are respected when autosizing?

- `onColumnResize`: Called while a column is being resized.
- `onColumnWidthChange`: Called after the width of a column is changed, but not during resizing.

## Autosizing [<span class="plan-pro"></span>](/x/introduction/licensing/#pro-plan 'Pro plan')

`DataGridPro` also allows for autosizing the columns' dimensions based on their content. It can be autosized by 3 methods:

- Double-clicking a column header separator on the grid,
- Calling the `.autosizeColumns(options)` API method,
- Adding the `autosizeOnMount` prop.

> You can pass options directly to the API method when you call it. If you need to configure autosize for the other two methods, you can provide the options in the `autosizeOptions` prop. Note that for the separator double-click method, the clicked column will be passed to the `.columns` option unless `autosizeOptions` already has a `.columns` list. In all cases, the `.minWidth` and `.maxWidth` options of columns will always be respected.

Author: I wanted to make it easy to enable autosizing all columns on double-click, that's why I allow the option there. The problem is we're using `autosizeOptions` for both mounting and double-clicking. Not sure what to do.

> You can pass options directly to the API method when you call it. If you need to configure autosize for the other two methods, you can provide the options in the `autosizeOptions` prop. Note that for the separator double-click method, the clicked column will be passed to the `.columns` option unless `autosizeOptions` already has a `.columns` list. In all cases, the `.minWidth` and `.maxWidth` options of columns will always be respected.

Reviewer 2: > enable autosizing all columns on double-click

Does that even sounds like a user's expectation? I mean why would I expect to auto size all columns when I double-click on the separator for a specific column. Or you mean double-clicking anywhere on the grid?

> You can pass options directly to the API method when you call it. If you need to configure autosize for the other two methods, you can provide the options in the `autosizeOptions` prop. Note that for the separator double-click method, the clicked column will be passed to the `.columns` option unless `autosizeOptions` already has a `.columns` list. In all cases, the `.minWidth` and `.maxWidth` options of columns will always be respected.

Reviewer 2: > For header separator double click, can we use other autosizeOptions and ignore autosizeOptions.columns and always use the column where the user double-clicked

Do you think we should consider trying this approach?

{{"demo": "ColumnAutosizing.js", "disableAd": true, "bg": "inline"}}

:::warning
Autosizing has no effect if dynamic row height is enabled.
:::

:::warning

> The datagrid can only autosize based on the currently rendered cells.

Reviewer 2: I think we are using it elsewhere like this
```suggestion
The data grid can only autosize based on the currently rendered cells.
```

Author: I prefer it in a single word, feels more reified as a component that way. As opposed to a variant of [grid](https://mui.com/material-ui/react-grid/).

Author: Yes, we should standardize it.

- `onColumnResize`: Called while a column is being resized.
- `onColumnWidthChange`: Called after the width of a column is changed, but not during resizing.

> ## Autosizing [<span class="plan-pro"></span>](/x/introduction/licensing/#pro-plan 'Pro plan')

Author: Remove the disable section?

`DataGridPro` also allows for autosizing the columns' dimensions based on their content. It can be autosized by 3 methods:

- Adding the `autosizeOnMount` prop,
- Double-clicking a column header separator on the grid,
- Calling the `apiRef.current.autosizeColumns(options)` API method.

> You can pass options directly to the API method when you call it. If you need to configure autosize for the other two methods, you can provide the options in the `autosizeOptions` prop. Note that for the separator double-click method, the clicked column will be passed to the `.columns` option, overriding the value of if it exists in `autosizeOptions`. In all cases, the `.minWidth` and `.maxWidth` options of columns will always be respected.

Reviewer 3: It will make future git diff easier to handle

```suggestion
You can pass options directly to the API method when you call it. If you need to configure autosize for the other two methods, you can provide the options in the `autosizeOptions` prop.
Note that for the separator double-click method, the clicked column will be passed to the `.columns` option, overriding the value of if it exists in `autosizeOptions`.
In all cases, the `.minWidth` and `.maxWidth` options of columns will always be respected.
```

```tsx
<DataGridPro
  {...otherProps}
  autosizeOptions={{
    columns: ['name', 'status', 'createdBy'],
    includeOutliers: true,
    includeHeaders: false,
  }}
/>
```

{{"demo": "ColumnAutosizing.js", "disableAd": true, "bg": "inline"}}

:::warning
Autosizing has no effect if dynamic row height is enabled.
:::

:::warning

> The datagrid can only autosize based on the currently rendered cells.

Reviewer 3: It should be at minimum two words to be coherent with `DataGrid` and https://www.notion.so/mui-org/Style-conventions-for-MUI-components-and-products-dff7d2d7d1ba4a4abd47f48cf345b800?pvs=4#8f86b8e3c0fb49e1b4df3276efb3848e.

```suggestion
The data grid can only autosize based on the currently rendered cells.
```

x the other cases.

However, I suspect Sam would push for as it references our data grid, not data grids in general.

```suggestion
The Data Grid can only autosize based on the currently rendered cells.
```

but this hasn't been applied very consistently so far, so unclear.

Author: I'll switch to `data grid` for now, but just to note I don't love `data grid` and even less `Data Grid` because it can be confused for a variant of [Grid](https://mui.com/material-ui/react-grid/).

Reviewer 3: To illustrate the move towards Data Grid: https://github.com/mui/mui-x/pull/5781/files, which is equivalent to the normalization ongoing in the core by @samuelsycamore.

History, grid would intuitively mean data gird, e.g. https://www.w3.org/WAI/ARIA/apg/patterns/grid/examples/data-grids/ uses this a bit interchangeably.

Reviewer 4: I would strongly prefer to see Data Grid capitalized to emphasize that we're talking about the product, not the general concept. `DataGrid` is an outdated convention that we're slowly trying to phase out of the docs. If you need to make it clear that you're talking about the code specifically, use `<DataGrid />`. Overall it's less what important _what_ we use so long as we apply it _consistently_.

DOM access is required to accurately calculate dimensions, so unmounted cells (when [virtualization](/x/react-data-grid/virtualization/) is on) cannot be sized. If you need a bigger row sample, [open an issue](https://github.com/mui/mui-x/issues) to discuss it further.
:::

### Disable autosizing

> Autosizing is enabled by default. If you want to turn it off, you can pass the `disableAutosize` prop to the datagrid.

Reviewer 3: I assume it's our current convention:

```suggestion
Autosizing is enabled by default. If you want to turn it off, you can pass the `disableAutosize` prop to the Data Grid.
```

- `onColumnResize`: Called while a column is being resized.
- `onColumnWidthChange`: Called after the width of a column is changed, but not during resizing.

## Autosizing [<span class="plan-pro"></span>](/x/introduction/licensing/#pro-plan 'Pro plan')

> `DataGridPro` allows to autosize the columns' dimensions based on their content. Autosizing is enabled by default. To turn it off, pass the `disableAutosize` prop to the datagrid.

Reviewer: > Autosizing is enabled by default.

This is a bit misleading since it could be understood as "columns are autosized by default", which is not the case.
Should we rephrase it to "Double-clicking a column header separator is enabled by default"?
@romgrk

Author: Sure, that sounds good.

Autosizing can be used by one of the following methods:

> - Adding the `autosizeOnMount` prop,

Reviewer: Nitpick: We could be more explicit when naming props. For example `autosizeColumnsOnMount`, `disableColumnsAutosize` and `columnsAutosizeOptions`
